The true is what he can; the false is what he wants. 
-MADAME DE DURAS! 
1 
'The Work of Art in the Age of 
Its Technological Reproducibility 
SECOND VERSION 
When Marx undertook his analysis of the capitalist mode of production, 
that mode was in its infancy.2 Marx adopted an approach which gave his 
investigations prognostic value. Going back to the basic conditions of 
capitalist production, he presented them in a way which showed what 
could be expected of capitalism in the future. What could be expected, it 
emerged, was not only an increasingly harsh exploitation of the proletar-
iat but, ultimately, the creation of conditions which would make it possi-
ble for capitalism to abolish itself. 
Since the transformation of the superstructure proceeds far more 
slowly than that of the base, it has taken more than half a century for the 
change in the conditions of production to be manifested in all areas of 
culture. How this process has affected culture can only now be assessed, 
and these assessments mllst meet certain prognostic requirements. They 
do not, however, call for theses on the art of the proletariat its sei-
zure of power, and still less for any on the art of the classless society. They 
call for theses defining the tendencies of the development of art under the 
present conditions of production. The dialectic of these conditions of 
production is evident in the superstructure, no less than in the economy. 
Theses defining the developmental tendencies of art can therefore con-
tribute to the political struggle in ways that it would be a mistake to un-
19 
20 PRODUCTION, REPRODUCTION, AND RECEPTION 
derestimate. They neutralize a number of traditional concepts-such as 
creativity and genius, eternal value and mystery-which, used in an un-
controlled way (and controLling them is difficult today), allow factual 
material to be manipulated in the interests of fascism. In what follows, 
the concepts which are introduced into the theory of art differ from those 
now current in that they are completely useless for the l)urposes of fas-
cism. On the other hand, they are useful for the formulation of revolu-
tionary demands in the politics of art [Kunstpoliti/~]. 
II 
In principle, the work of art has always been reproducible. Objects made 
by humans could always be copied by humans. Replicas were made by 
pupils in practicing for their craft, by masters in disseminating their 
works, and, finally, by third parties in pursuit of profit. But the techno-
logical reproduction of artworks is something new. Having appeared in-
termittently in history, at widely spaced intervals, it is now being adopted 
with ever-increasing intensity. Graphic art was first made technologically 
reproducible by the woodclLt, long before written language became re-
producible by movable type. The enormous changes brought about in 
literature by movable type, the technological reproduction of writing, 
are well known. But they are only a special case, though an important 
one, of the phenomenon considered here from the perspective of world 
history. In the course of the Middle Ages the woodcut was supplemented 
by engraving and etching, and at the beginning of the nineteenth century 
by lithography. 
Lithography marked a fundamentally new stage in the technology of 
reproduction. This much more direct process-distinguished by the fact 
that the drawing is traced on a stone, rather than incised on a block of 
wood or etched on a copper plate-first made it possible for graphic art 
to market its products not only in large numbers, as previously, but in 
daily changing variations. Lithography enabled graphic art to provide an 
illustrated accompaniment to everyday life. It began to keep pace with 
movable-type printing. But only a few decades after the invention of li-
thography, graphic art was surpassed by photography. For the first time, 
photography freed the hand from the most important artistic tasks in the 
process of pictorial reproduction-tasks that now devolved upon the eye 
alone. And since the eye perceives more swiftly than the hand can draw, 
the process of pictorial reproduction was enormously accelerated, so that 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 21 
it could now keep pace with speech. Just as the illustrated newspaper vir-
tually lay hidden within lithography, so the sound film was latent in pho-
tography. The technological reproduction of sound was tackled at the 
end of the last century. Around 1900, technological reproduction not 
only had reached a standard that permitted it to reproduce all known 
worl?s of art, profoundly modifying their effect, but it also had captured 
a place of its own among the artistic processes. In gauging this standard, 
we would do well to study the impact which its two different manifesta-
tions-the reproduction of artworks and the art of film-are having on 
art in its traditional form. 
III 
In even the most perfect reproduction, one thing is lacking: the here and 
now of the work of art-its unique existence in a particular place. It is 
this unique existence-and nothing else-that bears the mark of the his-
tory to which the work has been subject. This history includes changes to 
the physical structure of the work over time, together with any changes 
in ownership. Traces of the former can be detected only by chemical or 
physical analyses (which cannot be performed on a reproduction), while 
changes of ownership are part of a tradition which can be traced only 
from the standpoint of the original in its present location. 
The here and now of the original underlies the concept of its authen-
ticity, and on the latter in turn is founded the idea of a tradition which 
has passed object down as the same, identical thing to the pres-
ent day. The whole sphere of authenticity eludes technological-and of 
course tIot only technological-rel)roduction. But whereas the authentic 
work retains its full authority in the face of a reproduction made by 
hand, which it brands a forgery, this is not the case with techno-
logical reproduction. The reason is twofold. First, technological repro-
duction is more independent of the original than is manual reproduction. 
For example, in photography it can bring out aspects of the original that 
are accessible only to the lens (which is adjustable and can easily change 
viewpoint) but not to the human eye; or it can use certain processes, such 
as enlargement or slow motion, to record images which escape natural 
optics altogether. This is the first reason. Second, technological reproduc-
tion can place the copy of the original in situations which the original it-
self cannot attain. Above ali, it enables the original to meet the recipient 
halfway, whether in the form of a photograph or in that <1 gramophone 
22 PRODUCTION, REPRODUCTION, AND RECEPTION 
record. The cathedral leaves its site to be received in the studio of an art 
lover; the choral work performed in an auditorium or in the open air is 
enjoyed in a private room. 
These changed circumstances may leave the artwork's other properties 
untouched, but they certainly devalue the here and now of the artwork. 
And although this can apply not only to art but (say) to a landscape 
moving past the spectator in a film., in the work of art this process 
touches on a highly sensitive core, more vulnerable than that of any natu-
ral object. That core is its authenticity. The authenticity of a thing is the 
quintessence of all that is transmissible in it from its origin on, rang-
ing from its physical duration to the historical testimony relating to it. 
Since the historical testimony is founded on the physical duration, the 
former, too, is jeopardized by reproduction, in which the physical dura-
tion plays no part. And what is really jeopardized when the historical tes-
timony is affected is the authority of the object, the weight it derives from 
tradition. 
One might focus these aspects of the artwork in the concept of the 
aura, and go on to say: what withers in the age of the technological 
reproducibility of the work of art is the latter's aura. This process is 
symptomatic; its significance extends far beyond the realm of art. It 
might be stated as a general formula that the technology of reproduction 
detaches the reproduced object from the sphere of tradition. By replicat-
ing the work many times over, it substitutes a mass existence for a unique 
existence. And in lJermitting the reproduction to reach the recipient in his 
or her own situation, it actualizes that which is reproduced. These two 
processes lead to a massive upheaval in the domain of objects handed 
down fro111 the past-a shattering of tradition which is the reverse side of 
the present crisis and renewal of humanity. Both processes are intimately 
related to the mass movements of our day. Their most powerful agent is 
film. The social significance of film, even-and especially-in its most 
positive form, is inconceivable without its destructive, cathartic side: the 
liquidation of the value of tradition in the cultural heritage. This phe-
nomenon is most apparent in the great historical films. It is assimilating 
ever more advanced positions in its spread. When Abel Gance fervently 
proclaimed in 1927, "Shakespeare, Rembrandt, Beethoven will make 
films .... All legends, all mythologies, and all myths, all the founders of 
religions, indeed, all religions, ... await their celluloid resurrection, and 
the heroes are pressing at the gates, ') he was inviting the reader, no doubt 
unawares, to witness a comprehensive liquidation.3 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 23 
IV 
Just as the entire mode of existence of human collectives changes over 
long historical periods, so too does their mode of perception. The way in 
which human perception is organized-the medium in which it occurs-
is conditioned not only by nature but by history. The era of the migra-
tion of peoples, an era which saw the rise of the late-Roman art industry 
and the Vienna Genesis, developed not only an art different from that of 
antiquity but also a different perception. The scholars of the Viennese 
school Riegl and Wickhoff, resisting the weight of the classical tradition 
beneath which this art had been buried, were the first to think of using 
such art to draw conclusions about the organization of perception at the 
time the art was produced.4 However far-reaching their insight, it was 
limited by the fact that these scholars were content to highlight the for-
mal signature which characterized perception in late-Roman times. They 
did not attempt to show the social upheavals manifested in these changes 
in perception-and perhaps could not have hoped to do so at that time. 
Today, the conditions for an analogolls insight are more favorable. And if 
changes in the medium of present-day perception can be understood as a 
decay of the aura, it is possible to demonstrate the social determinants of 
that decay. 
What, then, is the aura? A strange tissue of space and time: the unique 
apparition of a distance, however near it may be.s To follow with the 
eye-while resting on a summer afternoon-a mountain range on the ho-
rizon or a branch that casts its shadow on the beholder is to breathe the 
aura of those mountains, of that branch. In the light of this description, 
we can readily grasp the social basis of the aura's present decay. It rests 
on two circumstances, both linked to the increasing emergence of the 
masses and the growing intensity of their movements. Namely: the desire 
of the present-day masses to "get closer" to things, and their equally pas-
sionate concern for overcoming each thing's uniqueness [Oberwindung 
des Einmaligen jeder Gegebenheit] by assimilating it as a reproduction. 
Every day the urge grows stronger to get hold of an object at close range 
in an image [Bild], or, better, in a facsimile [Abbild], a reproduction. And 
the reproduction [Reprodul?tion], as offered by illustrated magazines and 
newsreels, differs unmistakably from the image. Uniqueness and perma-
nence are as closely entwined in the latter as are transitoriness and re-
peatability in the former. The stripping of the veil from the object, the de-
struction of the aura, is the signature of a perception whose "sense for all 
24 PRODUCTION, REPRODUCTION, AND RECEPTION 
that is the same in the world»6 so increased that, by means of repro-
duction, it extracts sameness even from what is unique. Thus is mani-
fested in the field of perception what in the theoretical sphere is notice-
able in the increasing significance statistics. The alignment of reality 
with the masses and of the masses with reality is a process of immeasur-
able importance for both thinking perception. 
v 
The uniqueness of the work of art is identical to its embedded ness in 
the context of tradition. Of course, this tradition itself is thoroughly alive 
and extremely changeable. An ancient statue of Venus, for instance, ex-
isted in a traditional context for the Greeks (who made it an object 
of worship) that was different from the context in which it existed for 
medieval clerics (who viewed it as a sinister idol). But what was equally 
evident to both was its uniqueness-that is, its aura. Originally, the 
embeddedness of an artwork in the context of tradition found expression 
in a cult. As we know, the earliest artworks originated in the service of 
rituals-first magical, then religious. And it is highly significant that the 
artwork's auratic mode of existence is never entirely severed from its rit-
ual function. In other words: the unique value of the "authentic" work of 
art alwa')ls has its basis in ritual. This ritualistic basis, however mediated 
it may be, is still recognizable as secularized ritual in even the most pro-
forms of the cult of beauty. The secular worship of beauty, which de-
veloped during the Renaissance and prevailed for three centuries, clearly 
displayed that ritualistic basis in its subsequent decline and in the first se-
vere crisis which befell it. For when, with the advent of the first truly rev-
olutionary means of reproduction (namely photography, which emen~e<1 
at the same time as socialism), art felt the approach of that crisis which a 
century later has become unmistakable, it reacted with the doctrine of 
l' art pour tart-that is, with a theology of art. 7 This in turn gave rise to a 
negative theology, in the form of an idea of "pure" art, which 
only any function but any definition in terms of a re(>re:senltat:tol.1al 
content. (In poetry, Mallarme was the first to adopt this standpoint.)!! 
No investigation of the work of art in the age of its technological 
reproducibility can overlook these connections. They lead to a in-
sight: for time in world history, technological reproducibility 
work of art from its parasitic subservience to ritual. To 
an degree, the work reproduced becomes the reproduc-
tion of a work designed for reproducibility.9 From a photographic plate, 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 25 
for example, one can make any number of prints; to ask for the "authen-
tic" print makes no sense. But as soon as the criterion of authenticity 
ceases to be applied to artistic production, the whole social function of 
art is revolutionized. Instead of being founded on ritual, it is based on a 
different practice: politics. 
VI 
Art history might be seen as the working out of a tension between two 
polarities within the artwork itself, its course determined by sllifts 
in the balance between the two. These two are the artwork's cult 
value and its exhibition value. 10 Artistic production begins with figures in 
the service of magic. What is important is that they are 
present, not that they are seen. The elk depicted by Stone Age man on the 
walls of his cave is an instrument of magic, and is exhibited to others 
only coincidentally; what matters is that the see it. Cult value as 
such even tends to keep the artwork out of certain statues of gods 
are accessible only to the priest in the cella; certain images of the Ma-
donna remain covered nearly all year round; certain sculptures on medi-
eval cathedrals are not visible to the viewer at ground level. With the 
emanci/Jation of specific artistic practices from the service of ritual, the 
opportunities for exhibiting their products increase. It is easier to exhibit 
a portrait bust that can be sent here and there than to exhibit the statue 
of a divinity that has a fixed place in the interior a temple. A panel 
painting can be exhibited more easily than the mosaic or fresco which 
preceded it. And although a mass may have been no less suited to public 
presentation than a symphony, the symphony came into being at a time 
when the possibility of such presentation promised to be greater. 
The scope for exhibiting the work of art has increased so enormously 
with the various methods of technologically reproducing it that, as hap-
pened in prehistoric times, a quantitative shift between the two poles of 
the artwork has led to a qualitative transformation in its nature. Just as 
the work of art in prehistoric times, through the exclusive emphasis 
placed on its cult value, became first and foremost an instrument of 
which only later came to be recognized as a work of art, so today, 
through the exclusive emphasis placed on its exhibition value, the work 
of art becomes a construct lGebilde] with quite new functions. Among 
these, the one we are conscious of-the artistic function-may subse-
quently seen as incidental. This much is certain: today, film is the most 
vehicle of this new understanding. Certain, as well, is the fact 
26 PRODUCTION, REPRODUCTION, AND RECEPTION 
that the historicall110ment of this change in the function of art-a change 
which is most fully evident in the case of film-allows a direct compari-
son with the primeval era of art not only from a methodological but also 
from a material point of view. 
Prehistoric art made use of certain fixed notations in the service of 
magical practice. In some cases, these notations probably comprised the 
actual performing of magical acts (the carving of an ancestral IS It-
self such an act); in others, they gave instructions for such procedures 
(the figure demonstrates a ritual posture); and in stiH others, 
they provided objects for magical contemplation (contemplation of an 
ancestral figure strengthens the occult powers of the beholder). The sub-
jects for these notations were humans and their environment, which were 
depicted according to the requirements of a society whose technology ex-
isted only in fusion with ritual. Compared to that of the machine age, of 
course, this technology was undeveloped. But from a dialectical stand-
point, the disparity is unimportant. What matters is the way the orienta-
tion and aims of that technology differ from those of ours. Whereas the 
former made the maximum possible use of human beings, the latter re-
duces their use to the minimum. The achievements of the first technology 
might be said to culminate in human sacrifice; those of the second, in the 
remote-controlled aircraft which needs no human crew. The of the 
first technology are valid once and for all (it deals with irreparable lapse 
or sacrificial death, which holds good for The results of the sec-
ond are wholly provisional (it operates by means of experiments and 
endlessly varied test procedures), The origin the second technology lies 
at the point where, by an unconscious ruse, human beings first began to 
distance themselves from nature. It lies, in other words, in play. 
Seriousness and play, rigor and license, are mingled in every work of 
art, though in very different proportions. This implies that art is linked to 
both the second and the first technologies. It should be noted, however, 
that to describe the goal of the second technology as "mastery over na-
ture" is highly questionable, since this implies viewing the second tech-
nology from the standpoint of the first. The first technology really sought 
to master nature, whereas the second aims rather at an interplay between 
nature and humanity. The primary social function of art today is to re-
hearse that interplay. This applies especially to film. The function of film 
is to tfain human beings in the alJpercelJtions and reactions needed to 
deal with a vast alJparatus whose role in their lives is expanding almost 
daily. Dealing with apparatus also teaches them that technology will 
release them from their enslavement to the powers of the apparatus only 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 2'1 
when humanity's whole constitution has adapted itself to the new pro-
ductive forces which the second technology has set free. ll 
VII 
In photogl'at)h)~ exhibition value begins to drive bad? cult value on all 
fronts. But cult value does not give way without resistance. It falls back 
to a last entrenchment: the human countenance. It is no accident that the 
portrait is central to early photography. In the cult of remembrance of 
dead or absent loved ones, the cult value of the image finds its last refuge. 
In the fleeting expression of a human face, the aura beckons from early 
photographs for the last time. This is what gives them their melancholy 
and incomparable beauty. But as the human being withdraws from the 
photographic image, exhibition value for the first time shows its superi-
ority to cult value. To have this development its local habitation 
constitutes the unique significance of Atget, who, around 1900, took 
photographs of deserted Paris streets.!2 It has justly been said that he 
photographed them like scenes of crimes. A crime scene, too, is deserted; 
it is photographed for the purpose of establishing evidence. With Atget, 
photographic records begin to be evidence in the historical trial [Prozess]. 
This constitutes their hidden political significance. They demand a spe-
cific kind of reception. Free-floating contemplation is no longer appropri-
ate to them. They unsettle the viewer; he feels challenged to find a partic-
ular way to approach them. At the same time, illustrated magazines begin 
to put up signposts for him-whether these are right or wrong is irrele-
vant. For the first time, captions become obligatory. And it is clear that 
they have a character altogether different from the titles of paintings. The 
directives given by captions to those looking at images in illustrated mag-
azines soon become even more precise and commanding in films, where 
the way each single image is understood seems prescribed by the se-
quence of all the preceding images. 
VIII 
The Greeks had only two ways of technologically reproducing works of 
art: casting and stamping. Bronzes, terra cottas, and coins were the only 
artworks they could produce in large numbers. All others were unique 
could not be technologically reproduced. That is why they had to be 
made for all eternity. The state of their technology compelled the Greeks 
to tJroduce eternal values in their art. To this they owe their preeminent 
28 PRO Due T ION! REP ROD U C T ION, AND R E C E P T ION 
position in art history-the standard for subsequent generations. Un-
doubtedly, Ollr position lies at the opposite pole from that of the Greeks. 
Never before have artworks been technologically reproducible to such a 
degree and in sllch quantities as today. Film is the first art form whose ar-
tistic character is entirely determined by its reproducibility. It would be 
idle to compare this form in detail with Greek art. But on one precise 
point such a comparison would be revealing. For film has given crucial 
importance to a quality of the artwork which would have been the last 
to find approval among the Greeks, or which they would have dismissed 
as marginal. This quality is its capacity for improvement. The finished 
film is the exact antithesis of a work created at a single stroke. It is assem-
bled from a very large number of images and image sequences that offer 
an array of choices to the editor; these images, moreover, can be im-
proved in any desired way in the process leading from the initial take to 
the final Cllt. To produce A Woman of Paris, which is 3)000 meters long, 
Chaplin shot 125,000 meters of film.n The film is therefore the artwork 
most capable of improvement. And this capability is linked to its radical 
renunciation of eternal value. This is corroborated by the fact that for the 
Greeks, whose art depended on the production of eternal values, the pin-
nacle of all the arts was the form least capable of improvement-namely 
sculpture, whose products are literally all of a piece. In the age of the as-
sembled [montierbarJ artwork, the decline of sculpture is inevitable. 
IX 
The nineteenth-century dispute over the relative artistic merits of paint-
ing and photography seems misguided and confused today.14 But this 
does not diminish its importance, and may even underscore it. The dis-
pute was in fact an expression of a world-historical upheaval whose true 
nature was concealed from both parties. Insofar as the age of technologi-
cal reproducibility separated art from its basis in cult, all semblance of 
art's autonomy disappeared forever. But the resulting change in the func-
tion of art lay beyond the horizon of the nineteenth century. And even the 
twentieth, which sa w the development of film, was slow to perceive it. 
Though commentators had earlier expended much fruitless ingenu-
ity on the question of whether photography was an art-without asking 
the more fundamental question of whether the invention of photography 
had not transformed the entire character of art-film theorists quicl<ly 
adopted the same ill-considered standpoint. But the difficulties which 
photography caused for traditional aesthetics were child's play compared 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 29 
to those presented by film. Hence the obtuse and hyperbolic character of 
early film theory. Abel Gance, for instance, compares film to hieroglyphs: 
"By a remarkable regression, we are transported back to the expressive 
level of the Egyptians .... Pictorial language has not matured, because 
our eyes are not yet adapted to it. There is not yet enough respect, not 
enough cult, for what it expresses." IS Or, in the words of Severin-Mars: 
"What other art has been granted a dream ... at once more poetic and 
more real? Seen in this light, film might represent an incomparable means 
of expression, and only the noblest minds should move within its atmo-
sphere, in the most perfect and mysterious moments of their lives. » 16 It 
is instructive to see how the desire to annex film to "art" impels these 
theoreticians to attribute elements of cult to film-with a striking lack of 
discretion. Yet when these speculations were published, works like A 
Woman of Paris and The Gold Rush had already appeared. This did not 
deter Abel Gance from making the comparison with hieroglyphs, while 
Severin-Mars speaks of film as one might speak of paintings by Fra 
Angelico. 17 It is revealing that even today especially reactionary authors 
look in the same direction for the significance of film-finding, if not ac-
tually a sacred significance, then at least a supernatural one. In connec-
tion with Max Reinhardt's film version of A Midsummer Night's Dream, 
Wedel comments that it was undoubtedly the sterile copying of the exter-
nal world-with its streets, interiors, railway stations, restaurants, auto-
mobiles, and beaches-that had prevented film up to now from ascend-
ing to the realm of art. "Film has not yet realized its true purpose, its real 
possibilities .... These consist in its unique ability to use natural means 
to incomparably convincing expression to the fairylike, the marvel-
ous, the supernatural. "JH 
x 
To photograph a painting is one kind of reproduction, but to photograph 
an action performed in a film studio is another. In the first case, what is 
reproduced is a work of art, while the act of producing it is not. The cam-
eraman's performance with the lens no more creates an artwork than a 
conductor's with the baton; at most, it creates an artistic performance. 
This is unlike the process in a film studio. Here, what is reproduced is not 
an artwork, and the act of reproducing it is 110 more such a work than in 
the first case. The work of art is produced only by means of montage. 
And each individual component of this montage is a reproduction of a 
process which neither is an artwork in itself nor gives rise to one through 
30 PRODUCTION, REPRODUCTION, AND RECEPTION 
photography. What, then, are these pt'ocesses reproduced in film, since 
they are certainly not works of art? 
To answer this, we must start from the peculiar nature of the artistic 
performance of the film actor. He is distinguished from the stage actor in 
that his performance in its original form, from which the reproduction is 
made, is not carried out in front of a randomly composed audience but 
before a group of specialists-executive producer, director, cinematogra-
pher, sound recordist, lighting designer, and so on-who are in a position 
to intervene in his performance at any time. This aspect of filmmaking is 
highly significant in social terms. For the intervention in a performance 
by a body of experts is also characteristic of sporting performances and, 
in a wider sense, of all test performances. The entire process of film pro-
duction is determined, in fact, by such intervention. As we know, many 
shots are filmed in a number of takes. A single cry for help, for example, 
can be recorded in several different versions. The editor then makes a se-
lection from these; in a sense, he establishes one of them as the record. An 
action performed in the film studio therefore differs from the correspond-
ing real action the way the competitive throwing of a discus in a sports 
arena would differ from the throwing of the same discus from the same 
spot in the same direction in order to kill someone. The first is a test per-
formance, while the second is not. 
The test performance of the film actor is, however, entirely unique in 
kind. In what does this performance consist? It consists in crossing a 
certain barrier which confines the social value of test performances 
within narrow limits. I am referring now not to a performance in the 
world of sports, but to a performance produced in a mechanized test. In a 
sense, the athlete is confronted only by natural tests. He measures himself 
against tasks set by nature, not by equipment-apart fro111 exceptional 
cases like Nurmi, who was said to run against the clock.1.9 Meanwhile 
the work process, especially since it has been standardized by the assem-
bly line, daily generates countless mechanized tests. These tests are 
performed unawares, and those who fail are excluded from the work 
process. But they are also conducted openly, in agencies for testing pro-
fessional aptitude. In both cases, the test subject faces the barrier men-
tioned above. 
These tests, unlike those in the world of sports, are incapable of being 
publicly exhibited to the degree one would desire. And this is precisely 
where film comes into play. Film makes test performances capable of be-
ing exhibited, by tunting that ability itself into a test. The film actor per-
forms not in front of an audience but in front of an apparatus. The film 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 31 
director occupies exactly the same position as the examiner in an apti-
tude test. To perform in the glare of arc lamps while simultaneously 
meeting the demands of the microphone is a test performance of the high-
est order. To accomplish it is to preserve one's humanity in the face of the 
apparatus. Interest in this performance is widespread. For the majority of 
city dwellers, throughout the workday in offices and factories, have to re-
linquish their humanity in the face of an apparatus. In the evening these 
same masses fill the cinemas, to witness the film actor taking revenge on 
their behalf not only by asserting his humanity (or what appears to them 
as such) against the apparatus, but by placing that apparatus in the ser-
vice of his triumph. 
XI 
In the case of film, the fact that the actor represents someone else before 
the audience matters much less than the fact that he represents himself 
before the apparatus, One of the first to sense this transformation of the 
actor by the test performance was Pirandello.20 That his remarks on the 
subject in his novel Sigi1'a [Shoot!] are confined to the negative aspects of 
this change, and to silent film only, does little to diminish their rele-
vance. For in this respect, the sound film changed nothing essential. What 
matters is that the actor is performing for a piece of equipment-or, in 
the case of sound film, for two pieces of equipment. '<The film actor," 
Pirandel10 writes, "feels as if exiled. Exiled not only from the stage but 
from his own person. With a vague unease, he senses an inexplicable 
void, stemming from the fact that his body has lost its substance, that he 
has been volatilized, stripped of his reality, his life, his voice, the noises he 
makes when moving about, and has been turned into a mute image that 
flickers for a moment on the screen, then vanishes into silence .... The 
little apparatus will play with his shadow before the audience, and he 
himself must be content to play before the apparatus. ~'21 The situation 
can also be characterized as follows: for the first time-and this is the ef-
fect of film-the human being is placed in a position where he must oper-
ate with his whole living person, while forgoing its aura. For the aura is 
bound to his presence in the here and now. There is no facsimile of the 
aura. The aura surrounding Macbeth on the stage cannot be divorced 
from the aura which, for the living spectators, surrounds the actor who 
plays him. What distinguishes the shot in the film studio, however, is that 
the camera is substituted for the audience. As a result, the aura surround-
ing the actor is dispelled-and, with it, the aura of the figure he portrays. 
32 PROD U C T ION. REP ROD U C T ION, AND R E C E P T ION 
It is not surprising that it should be a dramatist such as Pirandello 
who, in reflecting on the special character of film acting, inadvertently 
touches on the crisis now affecting the theater. Indeed, nothing contrasts 
more starkly with a work of art completely subject to (Of, like film, 
founded in) technological reproduction than a stage play. Any thofough 
consideration will confirm this. Expert observers have long recognized 
that, in film, "the best effects are almost always achieved by 'acting' as 
little as possible .... The development, U according to Rudolf Arnheim, 
writing in 1932, has been toward "using the actor as one of the 'props; 
chosen for his typicalness and ... introduced in the proper context. "22 
Closely bound up with this development is something else. The stage ac-
tor identifies himself with a role. The film actor very often is denied this 
opportunity. His performance is by no means a unified whole, but is as-
sembled from many individual performances. Apart from incidental con-
cerns about studio rental, availability of other actors, scenery, and so on, 
there are elementary necessities of the machinery that split the actor's 
performance into a series of episodes capable of being assembled. In par-
ticular, lighting and its installation require the representation of an ac-
tion-which on the screen appears as a swift, unified sequence-to be 
filmed in a series of separate takes, which may be spread over hours in 
the studio. Not to mention the more obvious effects of montage. A leap 
from a window, for example, can be shot in the studio as a leap from a 
scaffold, while the ensuing fall may be filmed weeks later at an outdoor 
location. And far more paradoxical cases can easily be imagined. Let us 
aSSllme that an actor is supposed to be startled by a knock at the door. 
If his reaction is not satisfactory, the director can resort to an expedient: 
he could have a shot fired without warning behind the actor's back on 
some other occasion when he happens to be in the studio. The actor's 
frightened reaction at that moment could be recorded and then edited 
into the film. Nothing shows more graphically that art has escaped the 
realm of "beautiful semblance," which for 80 long was regarded as the 
only sphere in which it could thrive. 23 
XII 
The rej),-esentation of human beings by l1'leanS of an apparatus has made 
possible a highly productive use of the human being's self-alienation. The 
nature of this use can be grasped through the fact that the film actoes es-
trangement in the face of the apparatus, as Pirandello describes this expe-
rience, is basically of the same kind as the estrangement felt before one's 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 33 
appearance [Erscheinung] in a mirror-a favorite theme of the Roman-
tics. But now the mirror image [Bi/d] has become detachable from the 
person mirrored, and is transportable. And where is it transported? To a 
site in front of the masses. 24 Naturally, the screen actor never for a mo-
ment ceases to be aware of this. While he stands before the apparatus, he 
knows that in the end he is confronting the masses. It is they who will 
control him. Those who are not visible, not present while he executes his 
performance, are precisely the ones who will control it. This invisibility 
heightens the authority of their control. It should not be forgotten, of 
course, that there can be no political advantage derived from this con-
trol until film has liberated itself from the fetters of capitalist exploita-
tion. Film capital uses the revolutionary opportunities implied by this 
control for counterrevolutionary purposes. Not only does the cult of the 
movie star which it fosters preserve that magic of the personality which 
has long been no more than the putrid magic of its own commodity char-
acter, but its counterpart, the cult of the audience, reinforces the corrup-
tion by which fascism is seeking to supplant the class consciousness of 
the masses.2S 
XIII 
It is inherent in the technology of film, as of sports, that everyone who 
witnesses these performances does so as a quasi-expert. Anyone who has 
listened to a group of newspaper boys leaning on their bicycles and dis-
cussing the outcome of a bicycle race will have an inkling of this. In 
the case of film, the newsreel demonstrates unequivocally that any indi~ 
vidual can be in a position to be filmed. But that possibility is not enough. 
An)! person today can lay claim to being filmed. This claim can best be 
clarified by considering the historical situation of literature today. 
For centuries it was in the nature of literature that a small number of 
writers confronted many thousands of readers. This began to change to~ 
ward the end of the past century. With the growth and extension of the 
press, which constantly made new political, religious, scientific, profes-
sional, and local journals available to readers, an increasing number of 
readers-in isolated cases, at first-turned into writers. It began with the 
space set aside for "letters to the editor" in the daily press, and has now 
reached a point where there is hardly a European engaged in the work 
process who could not, in principle, find an opportunity to publish some-
where or other an account of a work experience, a complaint, a report, 
or something of the kind. Thus, the distinction between author and pub-
34 PROD U C T ION, REP ROD U C T ION, AND R E C E P T ION 
lic is about to lose its axiomatic character. The difference becomes func-
tional; it may vary from case to case. At any moment, the reader is ready 
to become a writer. As an expert-which he has had to become in any 
case in a highly specialized work process, even if only in some minor 
capacity-the reader gains access to authorship. Work itself is given a 
voice. And the ability to describe a job in words now forms part of the 
expertise needed to carry it out. Literary competence is no longer 
founded on specialized higher education but on polytechnic training, and 
thus is common property. 
All this can readily be applied to film, where shifts that in litera-
ture took place over centuries have occurred in a decade. In cinematic 
practice-above all, in Russia-this shift has already been partly real-
ized. Some of the actors taking part in Russian films are not actors in our 
sense but people who portray themselves-and primarily in their own 
work process. In western Europe today, the capitalist exploitation of 
film obstructs the human being's legitimate claim to being reproduced. 
The claim is also obstructed, incidentally, by unemployment, which ex-
cludes large masses from production-the process in which their pri-
mary entitlement to be reproduced would lie. Under these circumstances, 
the film industry has an overriding interest in stimulating the involve-
ment of the masses through illusionary displays and ambiguous specula-
tions. To this end it has set in motion an immense publicity machine, in 
the service of which it has placed the careers and love lives of the stars; 
it has organized polls; it has held beauty contests. All this in order to dis-
tort and corrupt the original and justified interest of the masses in film-
an interest in understanding themselves and therefore their class. Thus, 
the same is true of film capital in particular as of fascism in general: 
a compelling urge toward new social opportunities is being clandestinely 
exploited in the interests of a property-owning minority. For this rea-
son alone, the expropriation of film capital is an urgent demand for the 
proletariat. 
XIV 
The shooting of a film, especially a sound film, offers a hitherto unimag-
inable spectacle. It presents a process in which it is impossible to assign 
to the spectator a single viewpoint which would exclude from his or 
her field of vision the equipment not directly involved in the action be-
ing filmed-the camera, the lighting units, the technical crew, and so 
forth (unless the alignment of the spectator's pupil coincided with that of 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 35 
the camera). This circumstance, more than any other, makes any resem-
blance between a scene in a film studio and one onstage superficial and ir-
relevant. In principle, the theater includes a position from which the ac-
tion on the stage cannot easily be detected as an illusion. There is no such 
position where a film is being shot. The illusory nature of film is of the 
second degree; it is the result of editing. That is to say: In the film studio 
the apparatus has penetrated so dee/)ly into reality that a pure view of 
that reality, free of the foreign body of equipment) is the result of a spe-
cial procedure-namely, the shooting by the speciall)1 adjusted photo-
grat>hic device and the assembly of that shot with others of the smne 
kind. The equipment-free aspect of reality has here become the height of 
artifice, and the vision of immediate reality the Blue Flower in the land of 
technology,16 
This state of affairs, which contrasts so sharply with that which ob-
tains in the theater, can be compared even more instructively to the situa-
tion in painting. Here we have to pose the question: How does the cam-
era operator compare with the painter? In answer to this, it will be 
helpful to consider the concept of the operator as it is familiar to us from 
surgery. The surgeon represents the polar opposite of the magician. The 
attitude of the magician, who heals a sick person by a laying-on of hands, 
differs from that of the surgeon, who l11akes an intervention in the pa-
tient. The magician maintains the natural distance between himself and 
the person treated; more precisely, he reduces it slightly by laying on his 
hands, but increases it greatly by his authority. The surgeon does exactly 
the reverse: he greatly diminishes the distance from the patient by pene-
trating the patienfs body, and increases it only slightly by the caution 
with which his hand moves among the organs. In short: unlike the magi-
cian (traces of whom are still found in the medical practitioner), the sur-
geon abstains at the decisive moment from confronting his patient person 
to person; instead, he penetrates the patient by operating.-Magician is 
to surgeon as painter is to cinematographer. The painter maintains in his 
work a natural distance from reality, whereas the cinematographer pene-
trates deeply into its tissue. The images obtained by each differ enor-
mously, The painter's is a total image, whereas that of the cinematogra-
pher is piecemeal, its manifold parts being assembled according to a new 
law. Hence, the presentation of reality in film is incomparably the more 
significant for people of today, since it provides the equipment-free astJect 
of reality they ate entitled to demand from a work of art, and does so 
precisely on the basis of the most intensive interpenetration of reality 
with equipment. 
36 PRODUCTION, REPRODUCTION, AND RECEPTION 
xv 
The technological reproducibility of the artwork changes the relation of 
the masses to art. The extremely backward attitude toward a Picasso 
painting changes into a highly progressive reaction to a Chaplin film. The 
progressive attitude is characterized by an immediate, intimate fusion of 
pleasure-pleasure in seeing and experiencing-with an attitude of ex-
pert appraisal. Such a fusion is an important social index. As is clearly 
seen in the case of painting, the more reduced the social impact of an art 
form, the more widely criticism and enjoyment of it diverge in the public. 
The conventional is uncritically enjoyed, while the truly new is criticized 
with aversion. Not so in the cinema. The decisive reason for this is that 
nowhere more than in the cinema are the reactions of individuals, which 
together make up the massive reaction of the audience, determined by the 
imminent concentration of reactions into a mass. No sooner are these re-
actions manifest than they regulate one another. Again, the comparison 
with painting is fruitful. A painting has always exerted a claim to be 
viewed primarily by a single person or by a few. The simultaneous view-
ing of paintings by a large audience, as happens in the nineteenth century, 
is an early symptom of the crisis in painting, a crisis triggered not only by 
photography but, in a relatively independent way, by the artwodc's claim 
to the attention of the masses. 
Painting, by its nature, cannot provide an object of simultaneous col-
lective reception, as architecture has always been able to do, as the epic 
poem could do at one time, and as film is able to do today. And although 
direct conclusions about the social role of painting cannot be drawn from 
this fact alone, it does have a strongly adverse effect whenever painting 
is led by special circumstances, as if against its nature, to confront the 
masses directly. In the churches and monasteries of the Middle Ages, and 
at the princely courts up to about the end of the eighteenth century, 
the collective reception of paintings took place not simultaneously but 
in a manifoldly graduated and hierarchically mediated way. If that has 
changed, the change testifies to the special conflict in which painting has 
become enmeshed by the technological reproducibility of the image. And 
while efforts have been made to present paintings to the masses in galler-
ies and salons, this mode of reception gives the masses no means of orga-
nizing and regulating their response. Thus, the same public which reacts 
progressively to a slapstick comedy inevitably displays a backward atti-
tude toward Surrealism. 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 37 
XVI 
The most important social function of film is to establish equilibrium be-
tween human beings and the apparatus. Film achieves this goa] not only 
in terms of man's presentation of himself to the camera but also in terms 
of his representation of his environment by means of this apparatus. On 
the one hand, film furthers insight into the necessities governing our lives 
by its use of close-ups, by its accentuation of hidden details in familiar 
objects, and by its exploration of commonplace milieux through the inge-
nious guidance of the camera; on the other hand, it manages to assure us 
of a vast and unsuspected field of action [Spielraum]. 
Our bars and city streets, our offices and furnished rooms, our rail-
road stations and our factories seemed to close relentlessly around us. 
Then came film and exploded this prison-world with the dynamite of the 
split second, so that now we can set off calmly on journeys of adven-
ture among its far-flung debris. With the close-up, space expands; with 
slow motion, movement is extended. And just as enlargement not merely 
clarifies what we see indistinctly "in any case," but brings to light entirely 
new structures of matter, slow motion not only reveals familiar aspects of 
movements, but discloses quite unknown aspects within them-aspects 
"which do not appear as the retarding of natural movements but have a 
curious gliding, floating character of their own."27 Clearly, it is another 
nature which speaks to the camera as compared to the eye. "Other" 
above all in the sense that a space informed by human consciousness 
gives way to a space informed by the unconscious. Whereas it is a com-
monplace that, for example, we have some idea what is involved in the 
act of walking (if only in general terms), we have no idea at all what hap-
pens during the split second when a person actually takes a step. We are 
familiar with the movement of picking up a cigarette lighter or a spoon, 
but know almost nothing of what really goes on between hand and 
metal, and still less how this varies with different moods. This is where 
the camera comes into play, with all its resources for swooping and 
rising, disrupting and isolating, stretching or compressing a sequence, 
enlarging or reducing an object. It is through the camera that we first dis-
cover the optical unconscious, just as we discover the instinctual uncon-
scious through psychoanalysis. 
Moreover, these two types of unconscious are intimately linked. For in 
most cases the diverse aspects of reality captured by the film camera lie 
outside only the normal spectrum of sense impressions. Many of the de-
38 PRODUCTION, REPRODUCTION, AND RECEPTION 
formations and stereotypes, transformations and catastrophes which can 
assail the optical world in films afflict the actual world in psychoses, hal-
lucinations, and dreams. Thanks to the camera, therefore, the individual 
perceptions of the psychotic or the dreamer can be appropriated by col-
lective perception. The ancient truth expressed by Heraclitus, that those 
who are awake have a world in common while each sleeper has a world 
of his own, has been invalidated by film-and less by depicting the dream 
world itself than by creating figures of collective dream, such as the 
globe-encircling Mickey Mouse.2S 
If one considers the dangerous tensions which technology and its con-
sequences have engendered in the masses at large-tendencies which at 
critical stages take on a psychotic character-one also has to recognize 
that this same technologization [Technisierung] has created the possibil-
ity of psychic immunization against such mass psychoses. It does so 
by means of certain films in which the forced development of sadistic fan-
tasies or masochistic delusions can prevent their natural and danger-
ous maturation in the masses. Collective laughter is one such preemptive 
and healing outbreak of mass psychosis. The countless grotesque events 
consumed in films are a grapl1ic indication of the dangers threatening 
mankind from the repressions implicit in civilization. American slapstick 
comedies and Disney films trigger a therapeutic release of unconscious 
energies.29 Their forerunner was the figure of the eccentric. He was the 
first to inhabit the new fields of action opened up by film-the first occu-
pant of the newly built hOllse. This is the context in which Chaplin takes 
on historical significance. 
XVII 
It has always been one of the primary tasks of art to create a demand 
whose hour of full satisfaction has not yet come.30 The history of every 
art form has critical periods in which the particular form strains after ef-
fects which can be easily achieved only with a changed technical stan-
dard-that is to say, in a new art form. The excesses and crudities of art 
which thus result, particularly in periods of so-called decadence, actually 
emerge from the core of its richest historical energies. In recent years, Da-
daism has amused itself with such barbarisms. Only now is its impulse 
recognizable: Dadaism attempted to produce with the means of painting 
(or literature) the effects which the public today seeks in film. 
Every fundamentally new, pioneering creation of demand will over-
shoot its target. Dadaism did so to the extent that it sacrificed the market 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 39 
values so characteristic of film in favor of more significant aspirations-
of which, to be sure, it was unaware in the form described here. The Da-
daists attached much less importance to tbe commercial usefulness of 
their artworks than to the uselessness of those works as objects of con-
templative immersion. They sought to achieve this uselessness not least 
by thorough degmdation of their materiaL Their poems are "word-
salad" containing obscene expressions and every imaginable kind of lin-
guistic refuse. The same is true of their paintings, on which they mounted 
buttons or train tickets. What they achieved by such means was a ruth-
less annihilation of the aura in every object they produced, which they 
branded as a reproduction through the very means of its production. Be-
fore a painting by Arp or a poem by August Stramm, it is impossible to 
take time for concentration and evaluation, as one can before a painting 
by Derain or a poem by Rilke. JJ Contemplative immersion-which, as 
the bourgeoisie degenerated, became a breeding ground for asocial be-
havior-is here opposed by distraction [Ablen!<ung] as a variant of social 
behavior. Dadaist manifestations actually guaranteed a quite vehement 
distraction by making artworks the center of scandal. One requirement 
was paramount: to olltrage the public. 
From an alluring visual composition or an enchanting fabric of sound, 
the Dadaists turned the artwork into a missile. It jolted the viewer, taking 
on a tactile [taktisch] quality. It thereby fostered the demand for film, 
since the distracting element in film is also primarily tactile, being based 
on successive changes of scene and focus which have a percussive effect 
on the spectator.32 Film has fteed the physical shock effect-which Dada-
ism had kept wrapped, as it were, inside the moral shock effect-from 
this wrapping. 
XVIII 
The masses are a matrix from which aU customary behavior toward 
works of art is today emerging newborn. Quantity has been transformed 
into quality: the greatly increased mass of participants has produced a 
different l<ind of participation. The fact that this new mode of participa-
tion first appeared in a disreputable form should not mislead the ob-
server. The masses are criticized for seeking distraction [Zerstreuung] in 
the work of art, whereas the art lover supposedly approaches it with con-
centration. In the case of the masses, the artwork is seen as a means of en-
tertainment; in the case of the art lover, it is considered an object of devo-
tion.-This calls for closer examination.33 Distraction and concentration 
40 PRODUCTION, REPRODUCTION, AND RECEPTION 
form an antithesis, which may be formulated as follows. A person who 
concentrates before a work of art is absorbed by it; he enters into the 
work, just as, according to legend, a Chinese painter entered his com-
pleted painting while beholding it.34 By contrast, the distracted masses 
absorb the work of art into themselves. Their waves lap around it; they 
encompass it with their tide. This is most obvious with regard to build-
ings. Architecture has always offered the prototype of an artwork that is 
received in a state of distraction and through the collective. The laws of 
architecture's reception are highly instructive. 
Buildings have accompanied human existence since primeval times. 
Many art forms have come into being and passed away. Tragedy begins 
with the Greeks, is extinguished along with them, and is revived centu-
ries later. The epic, which originates in the early days of peoples, dies 
out in Europe at the end of the Renaissance. Panel painting is a cre-
ation of the Middle Ages, and nothing guarantees its uninterrupted exis-
tence. But the human need for shelter is permanent. Architecture has 
never had fallow periods. Its history is longer than that of any other art, 
and its effect ought to be recognized in any attempt to account for the re-
lationship of the masses to the work of art. Buildings are received in a 
twofojd manner: by use and by perception. Or, better: tactilely and opti-
cally. Such reception cannot be understood in terms of the concentrated 
attention of a traveler before a famous building. On the tactile side, there 
is no counterpart to what contemplation is on the optical side. Tactile re-
ception comes about not so much by way of attention as by way of habit. 
The latter largely determines even the optical reception of architecture, 
which spontaneously takes the form of casual noticing, rather than atten-
tive observation. Under certain circumstances, this form of reception 
shaped by architecture acquires canonical value. For the tas/<.s which face 
the human apparatus of perception at historical turning points cannot be 
performed solely by optical means-that is, by way of contemplation. 
They are mastered gradually-taking their cue from tactile reception-
through habit. 
Even the distracted person can form habits. What is more, the ability 
to master certain tasks in a state of distraction first proves that their per-
formance has become habitual. The sort of distraction that is provided 
by art represents a covert measure of the extent to which it has become 
possible to perform new tasks of apperception. Since, moreover, individ-
uals are tempted to evade such tasks, art will tackle the most difficult and 
most important tasks wherever it is able to mobilize the masses. It does 
so currently in film. RecelJtion in distraction-the sort of reception which 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 41 
is increasingly noticeable in all areas of art and is a symtJtom of profound 
changes in apperception-finds in film its true training ground. Film, by 
virtue of its shock effects, is predisposed to this form of reception. In this 
respect, too, it proves to be the most important subject matter, at present, 
for the theory of perception which the Greeks called aesthetics. 35 
XIX 
The increasing proletarianization of modern man and the increasing for-
mation of masses are two sides of the same process. Fascism attempts to 
organize the newly proletarianized masses while leaving intact the prop-
erty relations which they strive to abolish. It sees its salvation in granting 
expression to the masses-but on no account granting them rights. 36 The 
masses have a right to changed property relations; fascism seeks to give 
them expression in keeping these relations unchanged. The logical out-
come of fascism is an aestheticizing of political life. With D' Annunzio, 
decadence made its entry into political life; with Marinetti, Futurism; and 
with Hitler, the Bohemian tradition of Schwa bing. 37 
All efforts to aestheticize politics culminate in one point. That one 
point is war. War, and only war, makes it possible to set a goal for mass 
movements on the grandest scale while preserving traditional property 
relations. That is how the situation presents itself in political terms. In 
technological terms it can be formulated as follows: only war makes it 
possible to mobilize all of today's technological resources whiJe main-
taining property relations. It goes without saying that the fascist 
glorification of war does not make use of these arguments. Nevertheless, 
a glance at such glorification is instructive. In Marinetti's manifesto for 
the colonial war in Ethiopia, we read: 
For twenty-seven years, we Futurists have rebelled against the idea that 
war is anti-aesthetic .... We therefore state: ... War is beautiful because-
thanks to its gas masks, its terrifying megaphones, its flame throwers, and 
light tanks-it establishes man's dominion over the subjugated machine. 
War is beautiful because it inaugurates the dreamed-of metallization of the 
human body. War is beautiful because it enriches a flowering meadow with 
the fiery orchids of machine-guns. War is beautiful because it combines 
gllnfire) barrages, cease-fires, scents, and the fragrance of putrefaction into 
a symphony. \'{!ar is beautiful because it creates new architectures, like 
those of armored tanks, geometric squadrons of aircraft, spirals of smoke 
from burning villages, and much more .... Poets and artists of Futurism, 
42 PROD U C T ION, REP ROD U C T ION, AND R E C E P T ION 
... remember these principles of an aesthetic of war, that they may illumi-
nate ... your struggles for a new poetry and a new sculpture!J8 
This manifesto has the merit of clarity. The question it poses deserves 
to be taken up by the dialectician. To him, the aesthetic of modern war-
fare appears as follows: if the natural use of productive forces is impeded 
by the property system, then the increase in technological means, in 
speed, in sources of energy will press toward an unnatural use. This is 
found in war, and the destruction caused by war furnishes proof that so-
ciety was not mature enough to make technology its organ, that technol-
ogy was not sufficiently developed to master the elemental forces of soci-
ety. The most horrifying features of imperialist war are determined by the 
discrepancy between the enormous means of production and their inade-
quate use in the process of production (in other words, by unemployment 
and the lack of markets). Imperialist war is an U1Jrising on the part of 
technology, which demands repayment in "human material" for the nat-
ural 11'laterial society has denied it. Instead of deploying power stations 
across the land, society deploys manpower in the form of armies. Instead 
of promoting air traffic, it promotes traffic in shells. And in gas warfare it 
has found a new means of abolishing the aura. 
"Fiat ars-pereat mundus,"39 says fascism, expecting from war, as 
Marinetti admits, the artistic gratification of a sense perception altered by 
technology. This is evidently the consummation of rart /Jour ['art. Hu-
mankind, which once, in Homer, was an object of contemplation for the 
Olympian gods, has now become one for itself. Its self-alienation has 
reached the point where it can experience its own annihilation as a su-
preme aesthetic pleasure. Such is the aestheticizing of politics, as prac-
ticed by fascism. Communism replies by politicizing art. 
Written late December 1935-beginning of February 1936; unpublished in this form in 
Benjamin's lifetime. Gesammelte Schriftell, VII, 350-384. Translated by Edmund Jephcott 
and Harry Zohl1. 
Notes 
This version of the essay "Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Repro-
duzierbarkeit" (first published in Volume 7 of Benjamin's Gesammelte Schriften, 
in 1989) is a revision and expansion (by seven manuscript pages) of the first ver-
sion of the essay, which was composed in Paris in the autumn of 1935. The sec-
ond version represents the form in which Benjamin originally wished to see the 
work published; it served, in fact, as the basis for the first publication of the es-
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 43 
say-a somewhat shortened form translated into French-in the Zcitschrift fiir 
Sozialforschung in May 1936. The third version of the essay (1936-1939) can be 
found in Benjamin, Selected WritingsJ Volume 4: 1938-.1940 (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 2003), pp. 251-283. 
1. Madame Claire de Duras, nee Kersaint (1778-1828), the wife of Due 
Amedee de Duras, field marshal under Louis XVIII, was the author of two 
novels, Ourika (1823) and Edouard (1825). She presided over a brilliant sa-
Ion in Paris. Benjamin cites Madame de Dltras in the original French. 
2. Karl Marx (1818-1883) analyzed the capitalist mode of production in Das 
Kapital (3 vols., 1867, 1885, 1895), which was carried to completion by his 
collaborator Friedrich Engels (1820-1895). 
3. AbeJ Gance, "Le Temps de l'imagc est venu!" (It Is Time for the Image!), 
in Leon Pierre-Quint, Germaine Dulac, Lionel Landry, and Abel 
L'Al't chuJmatographique, vol. 2 (Paris, 1927), pp. 94-96. [Benjamin's note. 
Ganee (1889-1981) was a French film director whose epic films }'accuse 
(1919), La Roue (1922), and Napoleon (1927) made innovative use of sllch 
devices as superimposition, rapid intercutting, and split screen.-Trans.] 
4. AlDis Riegl (1858-1905} was an Austrian art historian who argued that dif-
ferent formal orderings of art emerge as expressions of different historical 
epochs. He is the author of Stilfragen: Gnmdlegungen zu einer Geschichte 
der Ornamel1tih (Questions of Style: Toward a History of Ornament; 1893) 
and Die spatromische KU11st-Industrie l1ach den Funden in Osterreich-
Unga1'11 (1901). The latter has been translated by Rolf Winkes as Late Ro-
man Art Industry (Rome: Giorgio Bretschneidet; 1985), Franz Wickhoff 
(1853-1909), also an Austrian art historian, is the author of Die Wiener 
Genesis (The Vienna Genesis; 1895), a study of the sumptuously illumi-
nated, early sixth-century A.D. copy of the biblical book of Genesis pre-
served in the Austrian National Library in Vienna. 
5. "Einmalige Erscheinung eincr Ferne, so nah sie sein mag." At stake in 
Benjamin's formulation is an interweaving not just of time and space-
einmalige Erscheinung, literally "one-time appearance"-but of far and ncar, 
eine Ferne suggesting both "a distance" in space or time and "something re-
mote," however near it (the distance, or distant thing, that appears) may be. 
6. Benjamin is quoting Johannes V. Jensen, Exotische Novel/en, trans. Julia 
Koppel (Berlin: S. Fischer, 1919), pp. 41-42. Jensen (1873-1950) was a 
Danish novelist) poet, and essayist who won the Nobel Prize for Literature 
in 1944. See "Hashish in Marseilles" (1932), in Benjamin, Selected Writings, 
Volume 2: 1927-1934 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999), 
p.677. 
7. Applying Kant's idea of the pure and disinterested existence of the work of 
art, the French philosopher Victor Cousin made lise of the phrase I 'art /Jour 
/'aft ("art for art's sake") in his 1818 lecture "Du Vrai, du beau, ct du bien" 
(On the True, the Beautiful, and the Good). The idea was later given cur-
44 PROD U C T ION, REP ROO U C T ION, AND R E C E P T ION 
rency by writers such as Thcophile Gantier, Edgar Allan Poe, and Charles 
Baudelaire. 
8. The French poet Stephane Mallarme (1842-1898) was a central figure in the 
Symbolist movement, which sought an incantatory language divorced from 
all referential function. 
9. In film, the technological reproducibility of the product is not an externally 
imposed condition of its mass dissemination, as it is, say, in literature or 
painting. The technological reproducibility of films is based directly all the 
technology of their production. This not only mal?es possible the mass dis-
semination of films in the most direct way, but actually enforces it. It does so 
because the process of producing a film is so costly that an individual who 
could afford to buy a painting, for example, could not afford to buy a 
tel' print of a] film. It was calculated in 1927 that, in order to make a profit, a 
major film needed to reach an audience of nine miJlion. Of course, the ad-
vent of sound film [in that year] initially caused a movement in the opposite 
direction: its audience was restricted by language boundaries. And that coin-
cided with the emphasis placed on national interests by fascism. But it is Jess 
important to note this setback (which in any case was mitigated by dubbing) 
than to observe its connection with fascism. The simultaneity of the two 
phenomena results from the economic crisis. The same disorders which led, 
in the world at large) to an attempt to maintain existing property relations 
by brute force induced film capital, under the threat of crisis, to speed up the 
development of sound film. Its introduction brought temporary relief, not 
only because sound film attracted the masses back into the cinema but also 
because it consolidated new capital from the electricity industry with that of 
film. Thus, considered from the outside, sound film promoted national inter-
ests; but seen from the inside, it helped internationalize film production even 
more than before. [Benjamin's note. By "the economic crisis," Benjamin re-
fers to the devastating consequences, in the United States and Europe, of the 
stock market crash of October 1929.-Trans.] 
10. This polarity cannot come into its own il1 the aesthetics of Idealism, which 
conceives of beauty as something fundamentally undivided (and thus ex-
cludes anything polarized). Nonetheless, in Hegel this polarity announces it-
self as clearly as possible within the limits of Idealism. We quote from his 
Vorlesungen zur Phi/osophie der Geschichte [Lectures on the Philosophy of 
History J: "Images were known of old. In those early days piety required 
them for worship, but it could do without beautiful images. Such images 
might even be disturbing. In every beautiful image, there is also something 
external-although, insofar as the image is beautiful) its spirit still speaks to 
the human being. But religious worship, being no more than a spiritless tor-
por of the soul, is directed at a thing . ... Fine art arose, .. in the church ... , 
though 3rt has now gone beyond the ecclesiastical principle." Likewise, the 
following passage from the Vorlesu1'lgen iJber die Asthetik [Lectures on Aes-
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 45 
thetics] indicates that Hegel sensed a problem here: "We are beyond the 
stage of venerating works of art as divine and as objects deserving our wor-
ship. Today the impression they produce is of a more reflective kind, and the 
emotions they arouse require a more stringent test.)' [Benjamin's note. The 
German Idealist philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770-1831) 
accepted the chair in philosophy at the University of Berlin in 1818. His lec-
tures on aesthetics and the philosophy of history (delivered 1820-1829) 
were later published by his editors, with the text based mainly on notes 
taken by his students.-Trans.] 
11. The aim of revolutions is to accelerate this adaptation. Revolutions are 
innervations of the collective-or, more precisely, efforts at innervation on 
the part of the new, historically unique collective which has its organs in the 
new technology. This second technology is a system in which the mastering 
of elementary social forces is a precondition for playing [das Spiel] with nat-
ural forces. Just as a child who has learned to grasp stretches out its hand for 
the moon as it would for a ball, so humanity, in its efforts at innervation, 
sets its sights as much on currently utopian goals as on within reach. 
For in revolutions, it is not only the second technology which asserts its 
claims vis-a-vis society. Because this technology aims at liberating human be-
ings from drudgery, the individual suddenly sees his scope for play, his field 
of action [SpielraumJ, immeasurably expanded. He does not yet know his 
way around this space. But already he registers his demands on it. For the 
more the collective makes the second technology its own, the more keenly 
individuals belonging to the collective feel how little they have received of 
what was due them under the dominion of the first technology. In other 
words, it is the individual liberated by the liquidation of the first technology 
who stakes his claim. No sooner has the second technology secured its initial 
revolutionary gains than vital questions affecting the individual-questions 
of love and death which had been buried by the first technology-once again 
press for solutions. Fourier's work is the first historical evidence of this 
demand. [Benjamin's note. Charles Fourier (1772-1837), French social the-
orist and reformer, urged that society be reorganized into self-contained 
agrarian cooperatives which he called "phalansteries." Among his works are 
Theorie des quatre mouvements (Theory of Four Movements; 1808) and L..e 
Nouveau Monde industl'iel (The New Industrial World; 1829-1830). He is 
an important in Benjamin's Arcades Project. The term Spielraum; in 
this note, in note 23, and in the text, literally means "pJayspace," "space for 
play."-Trans.] 
12. Eugene Atget (1857-1927), French photographer, spent his career in obscu-
rity making pictures of Paris and its environs. He is widely recognized as one 
of the leading photographers of the twentieth century. See Benjamin's "Little 
History of Photography" (1931), in this volume. 
13. A Woman of Paris (1923)-which Benjamin refers to by its French title, 
46 PRO Due T ION, REP ROD U C T ION, AND R E C E P T ION 
L'Opinion publique-was written and directed by the London-born actor 
and director Charlie Chaplin (Charles Spencer Chaplin; 1889-1977). Chap-
lin came to the United Stares with a vaudeville act in 1910 and made his mo-
tion picture debut there in 1914, eventually achieving worldwide renown as 
a comedian. He starred in and directed such films as The Kid (1921), The 
Circus (1928), City Lights (1931), Modem Times (1936), and The Great 
Dictator (1940). See Benjamin's short pieces "Chaplin" (1929) and "Chap-
lin in Retrospect" (1929), in this volume. 
14. On the nineteenth-century quarrel between painting and photography, see 
Benjamin's "Little History of Photography" (1931), in this volume, and 
Benjamin) The Arcades Project, trans. Howard Eiland and Kevin 
McLaughlin (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1999), pp. 684-
692. 
15. Abel Gance, "I.e Temps de l'image est venn!" in eArt cinthnatographique. 
vol. 2, p. 101. [Benjamin's note. On see note 3 above.-Trans.] 
16. cited ibid., p. 100. [Benjamin's note. Severin-Mars 
was a playwright and film actor who starred in three of Gance's films: 
La Dixieme Symphonie, Taccuse, and La Roue.-Trans.] 
17. Charlie Chaplin wrote and directed The Gold Rush in 1925. On Chaplin and 
A Woman of Paris, see note 13 above. Giovanni da Fiesole (1387-1455), 
known as Fra Angelico, was an Italian Dominican friar, celebrated for his 
"angelic~) virtues, and a painter in the early Renaissance Florentine style. 
Among his most famous works are his frescoes at Orvieto, which reflect a 
characteristically serene religious attitude. 
18. Franz Werfel, "Ein Sommernachtstraul11: Ein Film von Shakespeare und 
Reinhardt," Neues Wiener Journal, cited in Lu, November 15, 1935. 
[Benjamin's note. Werfel (1890-1945) was a Czech-born poet) novelist, and 
playwright associated with Expressionism. He emigrated to the United 
States in 1940. Among his works are Del' Abiturientel1tag (The Class Re-
union; 1928) and Das Lied lion Bernadette (The Song of Bernadette; 1941). 
Max Reinhardt (Maximilian Goldman; 1873-1943) was Germany's most 
important stage producer and director during the first third of the twentieth 
century and the single most significant influence on the classic German si-
lent many of whose directors and actors trained under him at the 
Deutsches Theater in Berlin. His direct film activity was limited to several 
early German silents and to the American movie A Midsumme1' Night's 
Dream (1935), which he codirected with William Dieterle.-Tral1s.] 
19. Paavo Nurmi (1897-1973), a Finnish long-distance runner, was a winner 
at the Olympic Games in Antwerp (1920), Paris (l924), and Amsterdam 
(1928). 
20. Beginning in 1917, the Italian playwright and novelist Luigi PirandeHo 
(1867-1936) achieved a series of successes on the stage that made him world 
famous in the 19205. He is best known for his plays Sei lJersollaggi i11 area 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 47 
d'autore (Six Characters in Search of an Author; 1921) and Enrico IV 
(Henry IV; 1922). 
21. Luigi Pirandello, II tumo (The Turn), cited by Leon Piene-Quint, "Significat-
ion du cinema," in L'Art cil1ematogratJhique, vol. 2, pp. 14-:1.5. [Benjamin's 
notel 
22. Rudolf Arnheim, Film als Kunst (Berlin, 1932), pp. 176-177. In this context, 
certain apparently incidental details of film directing which diverge from 
practices on the stage take on added interest. For example, the attempt to let 
the actor perform without makeup, as in Dreyer's Jeanne d'Arc. Dreyer 
spent months seeking the forty actors who constitute the Inquisitors' tribu-
nal. Searching for these actors was like hunting for rare props. Dreyer made 
every effort to avoid resemblances of age, build, and physiognomy in the 
actors. (See 1vlaurice Schultz, "Le Maquillage" [Makeup]' in CArt cinema-
tographique, vol. 6 IParis, 1929], pp. 65-66.) If the actor thus becomes a 
prop, the prop, in its turn, not infrequently functions as actor. At any rate, it 
is not unusual for films to allocate a role to a prop. Rather than selecting ex-
amples at random from the infinite number available, let us take just one es-
pecially revealing casco A clock that is running will always be a disturbance 
on the stage, where it cannot be permitted its role of measuring time. Even in 
a naturalistic play, real-life time would conflict with theatrical time. In view 
of this, it is most revealing that film-where appropriate-can readily make 
use of time as measured by a clock. This feature, more than many others, 
makes it clear that-circumstances permitting-each and every prop in a 
film may perform decisive functions. From here it is but a step to Pudovkin's 
principle, which states that "to connect the performance of an actor with an 
object, and to build that performance around the object, ... is always one of 
the most powerful methods of cinematic construction" (V. L Pudovkin, Film 
Regie und Filmmanuskript [Film Direction and the Film Script] (Berlin, 
1928), p. 126). Film is thus the first artistic medium which is able to show 
how matter plays havoc with human beings [wie die Materie dem Menschen 
mitstJieltj. It follows that films can be an excellent means of materialist ex-
position. [Benjamin's note. See, in English, Rudolf Arnheim, Film as Art 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1957), p. 138. Arnheim (1904-
2007), German-born Gestalt psychologist and critic, wrote on film, litera-
ture, and art for various Berlin newspapers and magazines from the mid-
1920s uoti11933. He came to the United States in 1940 and taugbt at Sarah 
Lawrence, the New School for Social Research, Harvard, and the University 
of Michigan. Besides his work on film theory, his publications include Art 
and Visual Perception (1954), Picasso's Guemica (1962), and Visual Thinking 
(1969). La Passion de Jeanne d'Arc, directed by Carl Theodor Dreyer, was 
released in 1928. Dreyer (1889-1968), Danish writer-director and film 
critic, is known for the exacting, expressive design of his films, his subtle 
camera movement, and his concentration on the physiognomy and inner 
48 PRODUCTION, REPRODUCTION, AND RECEPTION 
psychology of his characters. Among his best-known works are Vampyr 
(1931), Vredens Dag (Day of Wrath; 1943)j and Ordet (1955). Vsevolod 
IIIariollovich Pudovkin (1893-1953), one of the masters of Soviet silent cin-
ema, wrote and directed films-such as Mother (1926), The End of St. Pe-
tersburg (1927), and Storm over Asia (1928)-that showed the evolution of 
individualized yet typical characters in a social environment. l-le also pub-
lished books on film technique and .film acting.-Trans.] 
23. The significance of beautiful semblance [sch6J1er Schein] is rooted in the age 
of auratic perception that is now coming to an end. The aesthetic theory oJ 
that era was most fully articulated by Hegel, for whom beauty is "the ap-
pearance lErscheinungl of spirit in its immediate ... sensuous form, created 
by the spirit as the form adequate to itself" (Hegel, Werke, voL 10, part 2 
[Berlin, 1837], p. 121). Although this formulation has some derivative quali-
ties, Hegel's statement that art strips away the "semblance and deception of 
this false, transient world" from the "true content of phenomena" (Werke, 
vol. 10, part 1, p. 13) already diverges from the traditional experiential basis 
[Erfahmllgsgrund] of this doctrine. This ground of experience is the aura. 
By contrast, Goethe's work is still imbued with beautiful semblance 
as an aura tic reality. Mignon, Ottilie, and Helena partake of that reality. 
"The beautiful is neither the veil nor the veiled object but rather the object 
in its veil"; this is the quintessence of Goethe's view of art, and that of antiq-
uity. The decline of this view makes it doubly urgent that we look back at 
its origin. This lies in mimesis as the primal phenomenon of all artistic ac-
tivity. The mime presents what he mimes merely as semblance [Del' 
Nachnwchende macht. was er macht, l1ur scheillbarJ. And the oldest form of 
imitation had only a single material to work with: the body of the mime 
himself. Dance and language, gestures of body and lips, are the earliest man-
ifestations of mimesis.-The mime presents his subject as a semblance [Der 
Nachmachel1de macht seine Sache scheinbarJ. One could also say that he 
plays his subject. Thus we encounter the polarity informing mimesis. In mi-
tightly interfolded like cotyledons, slumber the two aspects of art: 
semblance and play. Of course, this polarity can interest the dialectician only 
if it has a historical role. And that is, in the case. This role is determined 
by the world-historical conflict between the first and second technologies. 
Semblance is the most abstract-but therefore the most ubiquitous-schema 
of all the magic procedures of the first technology, whereas play is the inex-
haustible reservoir of all the experimenting of the second. Nei-
ther the concept of semblance nor that of play is foreign to traditional aes-
and to the extent that the two concepts of cult value and exhibition 
value are latent in the other pair of concepts at issue here, they say nothing 
new. But this abruptly changes as soon as these latter concepts lose theif in-
difference toward history. They then lead to a practical insight-namely, 
that what is lost in the withering of semblance and the decay of the aLlra in 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 49 
works of art is matched by a huge gain in the scope for play [Spiel-Raum]. 
This space for play is widest in film. In film, the element of semblance bas 
been entirely displaced by the element of play. The positions which photog-
raphy had occupied at the expense of cult value have thus been massively 
fortified. In film, the element of semblance has yielded its place to the ele-
ment of play, which is allied to the second technology. Ramuz recently 
summed np this alliance in a formulation which, in the guise of a metaphor, 
gets to the heart of the matter. He says: "We are currently witnessing a fasci-
nating process. The various sciences, which up to now have each operated 
alone in their special fields, are beginning to converge in their object and 
to be combined into a single science: chemistry, physics, and mechanics are 
becoming interlinked. It is as if we were eyewitnesses to the enormously 
accelerated completion of a jigsaw puzzle whose first pieces took several 
millennia to put in place, whereas the last, because of their contours, and 
to the astonishment of the spectators, are moving together of their own 
accord" (Charles Ferdinand Ramuz, nature" [peasant, Nature], 
Mesure. 4 [October 1935]). These words ultimate expression to the di-
mension of play in the second technology, which reinforces that in art. 
[Benjamin's note. It should be kept in mind that Schein can mean "luster» 
and " as well as "semblance" or "illusion." On Hegel, see 
note 10 above. The poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832) visited 
Italy in 1786-1788 and in 1790, gaining new inspiration from his encoun-
ter with Greco-Roman antiquitYj a classically pure and restrained concep-
tion of beauty informs his creation of such female figures as Mignon in 
Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre (Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship; 1796), 
Ottilie in Die Wahlverwandtschaften (Elective Affinities; 1809), and Helena 
in Faust, Part II (1832). Benjamin's definition of the beautiful as "the ob-
ject in its veiP' is quoted (with the italics added) from his essay "Goethe's 
Elective Affinities" (1924-1925), in Benjamin, Selected Writings, Volume 1: 
19.13-1926 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996), p. 351, 
Charles Ferdinand Ramuz (1878-1947) was a Swiss writer resident in Paris 
(1902-1914), where he collaborated with the composer Igor Stravinsky, for 
whom he wrote the text of Histoire du soldat (The Soldier's Tale; 1918). He 
also published novels on rural life that combine realism with allegory.-
Tram.] 
24. The change noted here in the mode of exhibition-a brought about 
by reproduction technology-is also noticeable in politics. The crisis of de-
mocracies can be understood as a crisis in the conditions governing the 
public tJresentation of politicians. Democracies exhibit the politician di-
rectly, in person) before elected representatives. The parliament is his pub-
lic. But innovations in recording equipment now enable the speaker to be 
heard by an unlimited number of people while he is speaking, and to be 
seen by an unlimited number shortly afterward. This means that priority is 
50 PRODUCTION. REPRODUCTION. AND RECEPTION 
given to presenting the politician before the recording equipment. Parlia-
ments are becoming depopulated at the same time as theaters. Radio and 
film are changing not only the function of the professional actor but, 
equally, the function of those who, like the politician, present themselves 
before these media. The direction of this change is the same for the film actor 
and the politician, regardless of their different tasks. It tends toward the 
exhibition of controllable, transferable skills under certain social conditions, 
jllst as sports first called for such exhibition under certain natural condi-
tions. This results in a new form of selection-selection before an appara-
tus-from which the champion, the star, and the dictator emerge as victors. 
[Benjamin's note] 
25. It should be noted in passing that proletarian class consciousness, which is 
the most enlightened form of class consciousness, fundamentally transforms 
the structure of the proletarian masses. The class-conscious proletariat forms 
a compact mass only from the outside, in the minds of its oppressors. At the 
moment when it takes up its struggle for liberation, this apparently compact 
mass has actually already begun to loosen. It ceases to be governed by mere 
reactions; it makes the transition to action. The loosening of the proletarian 
masses is the work of solidarity. In the solidarity of the proletarian class 
struggle, the dead, undialectical opposition between individual and mass 
is abolished; for the comrade, it does not exist. Decisive as the masses are 
for the revolutionary leader, therefore, his great achievement lies not in 
drawing the masses after him, but in constantly incorporating himself into 
the masses, in order to be, for them, always one al110ng hundreds of thou-
sands. But the same class struggle which loosens the compact mass of the 
proletariat compresses that of the petty bourgeoisic. The mass as an impene-
trable, compact entity, which Le Bon and others have made the subject of 
their "mass psychology," is that of the petty bourgeoisie. The petty bour-
is not a class; it is in fact only a mass. And the greater the pressure 
on it between the two antagonistic classes of the bourgeoisie and the 
proletariat, the more compact it becomes. In this mass the emotional ele-
mcnt described in mass psychology is indeed a determining factor. But for 
that very reason this compact mass forms the antithesis of the proletarian 
which obeys a collective ratio. In the petty-bourgeois mass, the reac-
tive moment described in mass psychology is indeed a determining factor. 
But precisely for that reason this compact mass with its unmediated reac-
tions forms the antithesis of the proletarian whose actions are medi-
ated by a task, however momentary. Demonstrations by the compact mass 
thus always have a panicked quality-whether they give vent to war fever, 
hatred of Jews, or the instinct for self-preservation. Once the distinction be-
tween the compact (that is, petty-bollfgeois) mass and the class-consciolls, 
proletarian mass has been dearly made, its operational significance is also 
dear. This distinction is nowhere morc graphically illustrated than in the not 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 51 
uncommon cases when some outrage originally performed by the compact 
mass becomes, as a result of a revolutionary situation and perhaps within 
the space of seconds, the revolutionary action of a class. The special feature 
of such truly historic events is that a reaction by a compact mass sets off an 
internal upheaval which loosens its composition, enabling it to become 
aware of itself as an association of class-conscious cadres. Such concrete 
events contain in very abbreviated form what communist tacticians call 
"winning over the petty bourgeoisie." These tacticians have a further inter-
est in clarifying this process. The ambiguous concept of the masses, and the 
indiscriminate references to their mood which are commonplace in the Ger-
man revolutionary press, have undoubtedly fostered illusions which have 
had disastrous consequences for the German proletariat. Fascism, by con-
trast, has made excellent use of these laws-whether it understood them or 
not. It realizes that the more compact the masses it mobilizes, the better the 
chance that the counterrevolutionary instincts of the petty bourgeoisie will 
determine their reactions. The proletariat, on the other hand, is preparing 
for a society in which neither the objective nor the subjective conditions 
for the formation of masses will exist any longer. [Benjamin's note. Gustave 
Le Bon (1841-1931), French physician and sociologist, was the author of 
Psychologie des foules (Psychology of the Crowd; 1895) and other works.-
Trans.,! 
26. Benjamin alludes here to Heinrich von Ofterdingen, an unfinished novel by 
the German Romantic poet Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg; 1772-1801), 
first published in 1802. Von Ofterdingen is a medieval poet in search of the 
mysterious Blue Flower, which bears the face of his unknown beloved. See 
Benjamin'S "Dream Kitsch" (1927), in this volume. 
27. Rudolf Arnheim, Film als Kunst, p. 138. [Benjamin's note. In English in 
Arnheim, Film as Art, pp. 116-117. On Arnheim, see note 22 above.-
Trans.] 
28. Benjamin refers to Fragment 89 in the standard Diels-Kranz edition of the 
fragments of Heraclitus of Ephesus, the Pre-Socratic philosopher of the 
sixth-fifth centuries B.C. On Mickey Mouse, see the following note. 
29. Of course, a comprehensive analysis of these films should not overlook their 
double meaning. It should start from the ambiguity of situations which have 
both a comic and a horrifying effect. As the reactions of children show, com-
edy and horror are closely related. In the face of certain situations, why 
shouldn't we be allowed to ask which reaction is the more human? Some re-
cent Mickey Mouse films offer situations in which such a question seems jus-
tified. (Their gloomy and sinister fire-magic, made technically possible by 
color film, highlights a feature which up to now has been present only co-
vertly, and shows how easily fascism takes over "revolutionary" innovations 
in this field too.) What is revealed in recent Disney films was latent in some 
of the earlier ones: the cozy acceptance of bestiality and violence as inevita-
52 PROD U C T ION, REP ROD U C T ION, AND R E C E P T ION 
ble concomitants of existence. This renews an old tradition which is far from 
reassuring-the tradition inaugurated by the dancing hooligans to be found 
in depictions of medieval pogroms, of whom the "riff-raff" in Grimm's fairy 
tale of that title are a pale, indistinct rear-guard. [Benjamin's note. The inter-
nationally successful Mickey Mouse cartoon series developed out of the 
character of Mortimer Mouse, introduced in 1927 by the commercial artist 
and cartoon producer Walt Disney (1901-1966), who made outstanding 
technical and aesthetic contributions to the development of animation be-
tween 1927 and 1937, and whose short animated films of the thirties won 
praise from critics for their visual comedy and their rhythmic and unconven-
tional technical effects. See Benjamin's "Mickey Mouse" (1931), in this vol-
ume. "Riff-raW' translates "LumpengesindeJ," the title of a story in Jacob 
and Wilhelm Grimm's collection of tales, Kil1der- und Hausmarchel1 (Nurs-
ery and Household Tales; 1812, 1815).-Trans.] 
30. "The artwork," writes Andre Breton, "has value only insofar as it is alive to 
reverberations of the future." And indeed every highly developed art form 
stands at the intersection of three lines of development. First, technology is 
working toward a particular form of art. Before film appeared, there were 
little books of photos that could be made to Hit past the viewer under the 
pressure of the thumb, presenting a boxing match or a tennis match; then 
there were coin-operated peepboxes in bazaars, with image sequences kept 
in motion by the turning of a handle. Second, traditional art forms, at cer-
tain stages in theiL" development, strain laboriously for effects which later are 
effortlessly achieved by new art forms. Before film became established, Da-
daist performances sought to stir in their audiences reactions which Chaplin 
then elicited more naturally. Third, apparently insignificant social changes 
often foster a change in reception which benefits only the new art form. Be-
fore film had started to create its public, images (which were no longer mo-
tionless) were received by an assembled audience in the Kaiserpanorama. 
Here the audience faced a screen into which stereoscopes were fitted, one for 
each spectator. In front of these stereoscopes single images automatically ap-
peared, remained briefly in view, and then gave way to others. Edison still 
had to work with similar means when he presented the first film strip-be-
fore the movie screen and projection were known; a small audience gazed 
into an apparatus in which a sequence of images was shown. Incidentally, 
the institution of the Kaiserpanorama very clearly manifests a dialectic of 
development. Shortly before film turned the viewing of images into a collec-
tive activity, image viewing by the individual, through the stereoscopes of 
these soon outmoded establishments, was briefly intensified, as it had been 
once before in the isolated contempJation of the divine image by the priest 
in the cella. [Benjamin's note. Andre Breton (1896-1966), French critic, 
poet, and editor, was the chief promoter and one of the founders of the Sur-
realist movement, publishing the first Manifeste du surrealisme in 1924. In 
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 53 
Zurich in 1916, an international group of exiles disgusted by World War I, 
and by the bourgeois ideologies that had brought it about, launched Dada, 
an avant-garde movement that attempted to radically change both the work 
of art and society. Dadaist groups were active in Berlin, New York, Paris, 
and elsewhere during the war and into the 1920s, recruiting many nota-
ble artists, writers, and performers capable of shocking their audiences at 
public gatherings. On Chaplin, see note 13 above. Thomas Alva Edison 
(1847-1931) patented more than a thousand inventions over a sixty-year 
period, including the microphone, the phonograph, the incandescent electric 
lamp, and the alkaline storage battery. He supervised the invention of the 
Kinetoscope in 1891; this boxlike peep-show machine allowed individuals 
to view moving pictures on a film loop funning on spools between an elec-
tric lamp and a shutter. He built the first film studio, the Black Maria, in 
1893, and later founded his own company for the production of projected 
films. The Kaiserpanorama (Imperial Panorama), located in a Berlin ar-
cade, consisted of a dome-like apparatus presenting stereoscopic views to 
customers seated around it. See Benjamin~s "Imperial Panorama" (Chap-
ter 6 in this volume), excerpted from his Berlin Childhood around :1900 
(1938).-Trans.] 
31. Hans Arp (1887-J.966), Alsatian painter, sculptor, and poet, was a founder of 
the Zurich Dada group in 1916 and a collaborator with the Surrealists for a 
time after 1925. August Stramm (1874-1915) was an early Expressionist 
poet and dramatist, a member of the circle of artists gathered around the 
journal Der Sturm in Berlin. The French painter Andre Derain (1880-1954) 
became weH known when he, Henri Matisse, and Maurice de Vlaminck 
were dubbed the '(Fauves," or "wild beasts," at the 1905 Salon d'Automne. 
Rainer Maria Rilke (1875-1926), Austro-German lyric poet and writer, 
published his Duineser Elegien (Duino Elegies) and Sonette an Orpheus 
(Sonnets to Orpheus) in 1923. 
32. Let us compare the screen [Leinwand] on which a film unfolds with the can-
vas [Leinwand] of a painting. The image on the film screen changes, whereas 
the image on the canvas does not. The painting invites the viewer to contem-
plation; before it, he can give himself up to his train of associations. Before a 
film image, he cannot do so. No sooner has he seen it than it has already 
changed. It cannot be fixed on. The train of associations in the person 
contemplating it is immediately interrupted by new images. This consti-
tutes the shock effect of film, which, like all shock effects, seeks to in-
duce heightened attention. Film is the art form corresponding to the pro-
nounced threat to life in which people live today. It corresponds to profound 
changes in the apparatus of apperception-changes that are experienced 
on the scale of private existence by each passerby in big-city traffic, and on 
the scale of world history by each fighter against the present social order. 
[Benjamin's note. A more literal translation of the last phrase before the sen-
54 PROD U C T ION, REP ROD U C T ION I AND R E C E P T ION 
tence in italics is: "seeks to be buffered by intensified presence of mind 
[GeistesgegenwartJ." - Trans.] 
33. Sections XVII and XVIII introduce the idea of a productive "reception in dis-
traction" (Rezeptiol1 in der Zerstreuung), an idea indebted to the writings of 
Siegfried Kracauer and Louis Aragon. This positive idea of distraction-
Zerstreuung also means "entertainment"-contrasts with the negative idea 
of distraction that Benjamin developed in such essays as "Theater and Ra~ 
dio" (1932) and "The Author as Producer" (1934), both in this volume; the 
latter idea is associated with the theory and practice of Bertolt Brecht's epic 
theater. See "Theory of Distraction" (1935-1936), in this volume, 
34. Benjamin relates the legend of this Chinese painter in the 1934 version of his 
Berlin Childhood around 1900, in Benjamin, Selected Writings, Volu.me 3: 
1935-1938 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002), p. 393. 
35. The term "aesthetics" is a derivative of Greek aisthetikos, "of sense percep-
tion," from aisthanesthai. "to perceive. Jl 
36. A technological factor is important here, especially with regard to the news-
reel, whose significance for propaganda purposes can hardly be overstated. 
Mass reproduction is especially favored by the reproduction of the masses. 
In great ceremonial processjons, giant rallies and mass sporting events, and 
in war, all of which are now fed into the camera, the masses come face to 
face with themselves. This process, whose significance need not be empha-
sized, js closely bound up with the development of reproduction and record-
ing technologies. In general, mass movements are more clearly apprehended 
by the camera than by the eye. A bird's-eye view best captures assemblies of 
hundreds of thousands. And even when this perspective is no less accessible 
to the human eye than to the camera, the image formed by the eye cannot be 
enlarged in the same way as a photograph. This is to say that mass move-
ments, and above aU war, are a form of human behavior especially suited to 
the camera. [Benjamin's note] 
37. Gabriele D'Annunzio (1863-1938), Italian writer, military hero, and political 
leader, was an ardent advocate of Italy's entry into World War 1 and, a few 
years later, an ardent Fascist. His life and his work are both characterized by 
superstition, amorality, and a lavish and vicious violence. Futurism was an 
artistic movement aiming to express the dynamic and violent quality of con-
temporary life, especially as embodied in the motion and force of modern 
machinery and modern warfare. It was founded by the Italian writer Emilio 
Filippo Tomaso Marinetti (1876-1944), whose "Manifeste de Futurisme" 
(Manifesto of Futurism) was published in the Paris newspaper Le F'igaro in 
1909; his ideas had a powerful influence in Italy and Russia. After serving as 
an officer in World War I, he went on to join the Fascist party in 1919. 
Among his other works are a volLlme of poems, Guerra sola igiene del 
111undo (War the Only Hygiene of the World; 1915), and a political essay, 
F'uturismo e F'ascismo (1924}) which argues that fascism is the natural exten-
THE WORK OF ART: SECOND VERSION 55 
sion of Futurism. Schwa bing, a district of Munich, was much frequented by 
artists around the turn of the twentieth century; Hitler and other Nazi agita~ 
tors met in certain of its restaurants and beer cellars and plotted the unsuc-
cessful revolt against governmental authority known as the Beer Hall Putsch 
(1923). 
38. Cited in La Stampa Torino. [Benjamin's note. The German editors of 
Benjamin's Gesammelte Schriften argue that this passage is more likely to 
have been excerpted from a French newspaper than from the Italian newspa-
per cited here.-Trans. J 
39. "Let art flourish-and the world pass away." This is a play on the motto of 
the sixteenth-century Holy Roman emperor Ferdinand I: "Fiat iustitia et 
pereat mundus" ("Let justice be done and the world pass awayH). 